## Methodology

### Sample preparation
Wood was sourced from a local forest who supplied fresh (<24h post-felling) radiata pine logs ~1m long. These were milled in a Peterson circular swingblade portable mill to give two square sapwood boards with growth rings parallel to one sawn face (Rosie to insert picture of mill). The boards were then cut to 45x45mm squares using a band saw, then docked to give two 220mm long samples from each board. The samples were wrapped tightly in plastic and were immediately sealed on all six sides with a two pot epoxy-based sealant (Carboguard 635). After around 48 hours curing, a coat of matt white paint was applied to one ‘quarter sawn’ surface (Face A in Figure 1.) on each sample board. Once the paint had dried, the speckle patterns were applied using the method described below. Then the two adjacent non-speckled ‘flat sawn’ surfaces (Face B, in Figure 1, and the face opposite) were planed to expose two drying faces. The boards were wrapped tightly in plastic, weighed individually, and then taken immediately to the DIC room to start the experiment. If an experiment was not able to be started immediately, the boards were submerged in deionised water and placed in a 4°C chiller until required. 
To produce boards free of water tension, one set of boards was kiln dried immediately after sawing, then was pressure resaturated with water prior to be painted and prepared using the same method as the boards above. 

 
Figure 1. Wood sample showing orientation of growth rings relative to the measured face (A) and the drying faces (B)

### Speckle pattern

A random pattern was generated by Speckle Generator© (Correlated Solutions) and applied to a Grafix® Rub-onz transfer using a laser photocopier. This transfer was then stuck on the required sealed surface. Several speckle patterns were trialled by applying them to dried wood samples and photograping them using the DIC setup. These were then analysed using the usual VIC-3D parameters, and the speckle pattern with the consistently lowest sigma (error) value was chosen. This had the following Speckle Generator© settings: Radius: 0.02, Coverage: 75, Variation: 0.9. Three distinct A4-sized master speckle patterns were generated and these were photocopied onto the transfer film. When two sheets of transfer film were used in the same experiment, these were taken from different master patterns, to ensure the same speckle did not appear twice in any experiment.   

### Drying environment

Wood samples were air dried under controlled-temperature conditions. The DIC system was housed in a small well ventilated room with a continuously run extractor fan. The room was heated by a domestic fan heater connected to an on/off PID controller to maintain ~27° C. Relative humidity and temperature in the room were logged at 5-minute intervals using an Extech RHT50 USB logger which records temperature, relative humidity and atmospheric pressure. This remained connected to a computer during the experiment and the data downloaded from it periodically. During the experiment samples were placed on individual 1.2kg PT load cells (http://www.ptglobal.com/) and the load measured every 5 minutes and logged to a computer. At the end of the experiment the samples were oven dried, so that the moisture content of each board during the experiment could be calculated. 

### DIC setup

A VIC-3D image correlation system from Correlated Solutions was used. The system utilised two 5.0 megapixel cameras with 17mm lenses. The cameras were positioned approximately 1.25m from the surface of the boards and set to an aperture of f-11 to give sufficient field of view to have the board surfaces (insert picture of set up). Diffuse, lighting was provided via a fluorescent ceiling light off set from the cameras, and lightproof curtains ensured that lighting levels remained the same during the day and at night. A shutter speed of 1000ms was used to give an appropriate exposure, so that no part of the image was overexposed. Prior to planing the wood samples and starting an experiment (see sample preparation below) the system was calibrated according to the manufacturers specifications, using a calibration grid (supplied) which was slightly larger than the total area of the boards being measured. As soon as the prepared samples were placed in the camera area, photographs were taken at five minute intervals. To maintain calibration over the long time periods required (200-600 hours) no-one was to enter the room while an experiment was running. The experiment was monitored via a remote connection to the DIC and loadcell computers. 

### CT Scanning

For two DIC experiments, samples were prepared as above, and immediately prior to starting the DIC experiment (i.e. after the drying faces had been planed) the samples were x-ray CT scanned using a medical CT scanner (Siemens Somatom Spirit). The boards were analysed again following final oven drying, so the density profiles of the green wood, and the oven dried wood were compared. During scanning the boards were placed in a Perspex tray, surrounded by foam rubber to isolate the wood samples from each other, and from the plastic. 
Picture of the CT scanner to come. 
Something about how this was analysed.  

### Model for interpreting observed surface strains

Surface strains develop during drying driven by at least 3 interacting processes:

* Thermal strains
* Shrinkage due to loss of cell wall moisture
* Contraction due to water tension.

J to add more maths – WT10.html has a good description, but I haven’t had any luck importing it from html into word.  






  